Edits to Diagnostics ms (#1091)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/10.diagnostics.md

Therefore, tests that utilize sequencing require a number of additional molecular and analytical steps relative to tests that use PCR alone.

Sequencing has been an important strategy for discovery of SARS-CoV-2 variants (for example, see [@DOI:10.1101/2021.01.18.21249786]).
Sequencing elucidates any genetic variants located between the PCR primers.
For this reason, it is critical to genomic surveillance efforts.
Genomic surveillance is an important complement to epidemiological surveillance efforts [@doi:10/hkwr], as described below.
Through genomic surveillance, it has become possible to monitor the emergence of variants of interest (VOI) and variants of concern (VOC) that may pose additional threats due to increased contagiousness or virulence [@doi:10/hkwri; @url:https://cov-lineages.org].
Sequencing also allows for analysis of the dominant strains in an area at a given time.
Worldwide, the extent of genomic surveillance varies widely, with higher-income countries typically able to sequence a higher percentage of cases [@doi:10.1101/2021.08.21.21262393].

> Sequencing efforts are critically important to identifying variants containing mutations that might affect the reliability of molecular diagnostic tests [@doi:10.1038/s41576-021-00360-w; @doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.39.2001650].

Author: ```suggestion
Sequencing efforts are critically important to identifying variants containing mutations that might affect the reliability of molecular diagnostic tests, as well as mitigation measures such as therapeutics and prophylactics [@doi:10.1038/s41576-021-00360-w; @doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.39.2001650].
```

Therefore, sequencing is an important component of diagnostics: while it is not necessary for diagnosing an individual case, it is critical to monitoring trends in the variants affecting a population and to staying aware of emerging variants that may pose additional challenges.

##### Pooled and Automated PCR Testing

Due to limited supplies and the need for more tests, several labs have found ways to pool or otherwise strategically design tests to increase throughput.
The first such result came from Yelin et al. (2020) [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.26.20039438; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa531], who reportedt that they could pool up to 32 samples in a single qPCR run.
This was followed by larger-scale pooling with slightly different methods [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.02.022186].
Although these approaches are also PCR based, they allow for more rapid scaling and higher efficiency for testing than the initial PCR-based methods developed.
Pooling can also be employed in analysis with RT-qPCR [@doi:10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413685].

> #### Lateral Flow Tests

Author: Oh no, the merge conflicts won and text was duplicated! I tried so hard!

#### Limitations of Molecular Tests

Tests that identify SARS-CoV-2 using nucleic-acid-based technologies will identify only individuals with current infections and are not appropriate for identifying individuals who have recovered from a previous infection.
Among molecular tests, different technologies have different sensitivities and specificities.
In general, specificity is high, and even then, the public health reprecussions of a false positive can generally be mitigated with follow-up testing.
On the other hand, a test's sensitivity, which indicates the risk of a false-negative response, can pose significant challenge to large-scale testing.
False negatives are a significant concern for several reason.
Importantly, clinical reports indicate that it is imperative to exercise caution when interpreting the results of molecular tests for SARS-CoV-2 because negative results do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20].
To reduce occurrence of false negatives, correct execution of the analysis is crucial [@doi:10.1038/d41587-020-00002-2].

> Additionally, PCR-based tests can remain positive for a much longer time than the virus is likely to be actively replicating [@doi:10.1056/NEJMcp2117115], raising concerns about their informativeness after the acute phase of the disease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, PCR-based tests can remain positive for a much longer time than the virus is likely to be actively replicating [@doi:10.1056/NEJMcp2117115], raising concerns about their informativeness after the acute phase of the disease.
Hence why the CDC has advised individuals who suspect they have been re-infected with SARS-CoV-2 to avoid using diagnostic tests within 90 days of receiving a previous positive test [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/your-health/quarantine-isolation.html].
```

Similarly, the type of specimen could also influence outcomes, as success in viral detection varies among clinical sample types [@doi:10.1038/d41587-020-00002-2; @doi:10/gjrfns; @doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.50.2000568].
With CRISPR-based testing strategies, the gRNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, false positives and a loss of specificity can occur.

There are also significant practical and logistical concerns related to the widespread deployment of molecular tests.
Much of the technology used for molecular tests is expensive, and while it might be available in major hospitals and/or diagnostic centers, it is often not available to smaller facilities [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400].
At times during the pandemic, the availability of supplies for testing, including swabs and testing media, has also been limited [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00512-20].
Similarly, processing times can be long, and tests might take up to 4 days to return results [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400], especially during times of high demand, such as spikes in case numbers [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/31/travel/covid-test-chaos.html].

> Countries have varied in their strategies to employ molecular testing as a tool to reduce viral transmission, even among high-income countries [@url:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-07/a-stark-contrast-between-the-u-s-and-europe-on-tests].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Countries have employed various and differing molecular testing strategies as a tool to reduce viral transmission, even among high-income countries [@url:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-07/a-stark-contrast-between-the-u-s-and-europe-on-tests].
```

Reviewer: Is the meaning retained?

SARS-CoV-2 memory CD8^+^ T cells were slightly decreased (50%) 6 months post-symptom onset.
In this same subset of COVID-19 patients, 93% of subjects had detectable levels of SARS-CoV-2 memory CD4^+^ T cells, of which 42% had more than 1% SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4^+^ T cells.
At 6 months, 92% of patients were positive for SARS-CoV-2 memory CD4^+^ T cells.
Indeed, the abundance of S-specific memory CD4^+^ T cells over time was similar to that of SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4^+^ T cells overall [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4063].
T cell immunity to SARS-CoV-2 at 6 to 8 months following symptom onset has also been confirmed by other studies [@doi:10.1101/2020.11.01.362319; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.08.416636; @doi:10.1016/j.medj.2021.02.001].
In another study, T cell reactivity to SARS-CoV-2 epitopes was also detected in some individuals never been exposed to SARS-CoV-2.
This finding suggests the potential for cross-reactive T cell recognition between SARS-CoV-2 and pre-existing circulating HCoV that are responsible for the “common cold” [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.015], but further research is required.

> Therefore, whether T-cells will over a more stable measure through which to assess prior infection remains unknown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, whether T-cells will over a more stable measure through which to assess prior infection remains unknown.
Notably, commercial entities have tried to develop tests specifically for T cells, some of which have been authorized by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [@doi:10.1038/s41587-021-00920-9; @url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-authorizes-adaptive-biotechnologies-t-detect-covid-test] to identify people with adaptive T cell immune responses to SARS-CoV-2, either from a previous or ongoing infection. 
```
